---
ID: 827
post_title: Java 101
author: snippet java
post_date: 2016-10-03 18:57:55
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: http://watsonbeach.com/java-101/
published: true
inkblot_avatar:
  - "0"
inkblot_webcomic_group:
  - ""
inkblot_webcomic_image:
  - ""
inkblot_webcomic_order:
  - ""
inkblot_webcomic_comments:
  - ""
inkblot_webcomic_term_image:
  - ""
---
**Before you begin: ** This course uses **live code** technology. It will allow you to experiment and learn a new language very quickly without using any compilers or additional tools. We will also be testing you at the end of each learning module.   
  
Click the “Run” button to see results.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="150"] 

public class Hello { 
  public static void main(String [] args) { 
    System.out.println("Hello World!!!!!"); 
  } 
} 

[/playground]   
  
Traditionally the first program people write in a new language is called **hello world** because all it does is display the words **Hello, World**. In Java, this program looks like above snippet.   
  
Java programs are made up of class definitions, which have the form: </br> [code language="java"] class CLASSNAME { public static void main (String[] args) { STATEMENTS } } [/code] </br> Here **CLASSNAME **indicates a name chosen by the programmer. The class name in the example is **Hello**. </br> **main **is a method, which is a named collection of statements. The name **main **is special; it marks the place in the program where execution begins. When the program runs, it starts at the first statement in **main **and ends when it finishes the last statement.   
[su_divider] **1\.1 Variables** </br> A variable is a named location that stores a value. Values are things that can be printed, stored and (as we’ll see later) operated on. </br> To store a value, you have to create a variable. Since the values we want to store are strings, we declare that the new variable is a string: </br> [code language="java"] String studentName; [/code] </br> This statement is a declaration, because it declares that the variable named `studentName` has the type String. Each variable has a type that determines what kind of values it can store. For example, the **int **type can store integers, and the **String **type can store strings </br> </br> **Assignment** </br> Now that we know how to declare a variable , we want to store values. We do that with an assignment statement </br> [code language="java"] String studentName = "John"; // give studentName the value "studentName" int marks = 80; // assign the value 80 to marks char grade = 'A'; // set grade to 'A' [/code] 
*   When you declare a variable, you create a named storage location.
*   When you make an assignment to a variable, you give it a value In the below snippet two variables 

`firstName` and `lastName` are declared and assigned with `James` and `Smith` respectively. Both the variables are printed using `System.out.prinln()` </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="210"] class VariablesDemo{ // Generates some simple output. public static void main(String[] args) { String firstName = "James"; String lastName = "Smith"; //Printing the variables System.out.println("firstName is "+firstName); System.out.println("lastName is "+lastName); } } [/playground] </br></br> [su_divider] **1\.2 Strings:** </br></br> Strings, which are widely used in Java programming, they are a sequence of characters. In the Java programming language, strings are objects.The Java platform provides the String class to create and manipulate strings. Find out more about Classes in the section 5. </br> </br> String class has utility functions to perform different kind of operations on strings. Some of the useful functions are explained below   
  
**concat(): ** </br> The String `concat()` method concatenates the specified string to the end of current string. Another method to concatenate two string is using concatenation operator (**+**) </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="250"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String firstName = "John"; System.out.println("firstName is "+firstName); String lastName = " Smith"; System.out.println("lastName is "+lastName); System.out.print("Concat using concat() function, full name is:"); System.out.println(firstName.concat(lastName)); System.out.print("Concat using + operator, full name is:"); System.out.println(firstName+lastName); } } [/playground] </br> **length(): ** `length()` method returns the length of string. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="170"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String firstName = "John"; System.out.println(firstName + " is " + firstName .length() + " characters long"); firstName = "Linda"; System.out.println(firstName + " is " + firstName .length() + " characters long"); } } [/playground] </br> **charAt(): ** The `charAt()` method returns a character at specified index. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="170"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String firstName= "John"; System.out.println("The first character of "+firstName+" is "+firstName.charAt(0)); System.out.println("The fourth character of "+firstName+" is "+firstName.charAt(3)); } } [/playground] </br> **indexOf(): ** This `indexOf()` method returns the index within this string of the first occurrence of the specified character or -1, if the character does not occur. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="170"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String firstName = "John"; System.out.println("First occurrence of the letter 'J' is at "+firstName.indexOf('J')); System.out.println("First occurrence of the letter 'a' is at "+firstName.indexOf('a')); } } [/playground] </br> **replace(): ** The `replace()` method replaces all occurrence of first sequence of character with second sequence of character. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="170"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String fullName="John Smith"; System.out.println("fullName is "+fullName); String replacedName =fullName.replace("John","Linda"); System.out.println("Name after replacing is "+replacedName); } } [/playground] </br> **substring(): ** `substring()` method returns new string that is a sub-string of the original String. `replace()` method begins with the character at the specified index and extends to the end of this string or up to `endIndex – 1`, if the second argument is given. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String fullName="John Smith"; String firstName =fullName.substring(0,4);//This will fetch the sub string from the character at index 0 till 4 (4 is exclusive) System.out.println("firstName is "+firstName);//Print firstName String lastName =fullName.substring(5);//This will fetch the sub string from the character at index 5 till the end System.out.println("lastName is "+lastName);//Print lastName } } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge 1: ** </br> Assign your first name and last name to the variables `firstName` and `lastName` respectively.Then print the variable `fullName`. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="280"] public class Concat { public static void main(String args[]) { //Assign your first name String firstName = \_\\_\_; //Assign your last name String lastName = \_\_\_\_; //Join firstName and lastName and print it. String fullName = \_\______; System.out.println("Full name after joining is "+fullName); } } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class Concat { public static void main(String args[]) { //Assign your first name String firstName = "John"; //Assign your last name String lastName = " Smith"; //Join firstName and lastName and print it. String fullName = firstName.concat(lastName); System.out.println(fullName); } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] **Challenge 2: ** A variable `sentence` is defined with `James likes Maths class`. Change the value of sentence to `James likes English class`   
[playground] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String sentence = "James likes Maths class"; //Change the order to "James likes English class" sentence = __________\_\_; System.out.println(sentence); //assign length with the length of the new order string. int length = \_\_________; System.out.println("Length of the variable 'sentence' is: "+length); } } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class StringFunctions { public static void main(String args[]) { String sentence = "James likes Maths class"; //Change the order to "James likes English class" sentence = sentence.replace("Maths", "English"); System.out.println(sentence); //assign length with the length of the new order string. int length = sentence.length(); System.out.println("Length of the variable 'sentence' is: "+length); } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **1\.3 Numeric variables and operators** </br> Numeric variables are variables representing numbers.They can be of the following types in Java: [code language="java"] byte short int long float double [/code] </br> Operators are symbols used to represent computations like addition and multiplication. Most operators in Java do what you expect them to do because they are common mathematical symbols. For example, the operator for addition is +. Subtraction is -, multiplication is *, and division is /. </br> [code language="java"] int x = 100 + 50; //Value of x is 150 int x = (100 + 50) * 2; //Value of x is 300 int x = (100 - 50) / 2; //Value of x is 25 //add a number to itself int x = 25; x += 50; //Value of x is 75. //subtract a number from itself int x = 25; x -= 25; //Value of x is 0. //multiply a number by itself int x = 25; x *= 5; //Value of x is 125. //divide a number by itself int x = 25; x /= 5; //Value of x is 5. //increase a number intiable by one int x = 10; x ++; //value of x is 11 //decrease a number intiable by one int x = 10; x --; //value of x is 9 [/code] </br> **Note:**When both operands are integers (operands are the things operators operate on), the result is also an integer, and by convention integer division always rounds down, even in cases like this where the next integer is so close. </br> </br> **Order of operations** </br> When more than one operator appears in an expression, the order of evaluation depends on the rules of precedence </br> 
*   Multiplication and division happen before addition and subtraction. So 2*3-1 yields 5, not 4, and 2/3-1 yields -1, not 1 (remember that in integer division 2/3 is 0). 
*   If the operators have the same precedence they are evaluated from left to right. So in the expression `minute*100/60`, the multiplication happens first. 
*   Any time you want to override the rules of precedence (or you are not sure what they are) you can use parentheses. Expressions in parentheses are evaluated first, so 2 *(3-1) is 4. You can also use parentheses to make an expression easier to read, as in `(minute * 100) / 60`, even though it doesn’t change the result </br> Converting celsius to fahrenheit using the operators </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="520"] import java.util.Scanner; class TempConversion { public static void main(String args[]) { System.out.println(); int celsius = 100; //Using operators to convert from celsius to fahrenheit //To convert temperatures in degrees Celsius to Fahrenheit, multiply //by 1.8 (or 9/5) and add 32. int fahrenheit = celsius * 9 / 5 + 32; String message = celsius +" C is " + fahrenheit + " F."; System.out.println(message); //To convert temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit to Celsius, subtract //32 and multiply by .5556 (or 5/9). // And back to celsius to validate the answer int fahrenheitToCelsius = (fahrenheit - 32) * 5 / 9; message = fahrenheit +" F is " + fahrenheitToCelsius + " C."; System.out.println(message); } } [/playground] 

  
  
**Challenge: ** The radius is defined. Find the area and circumference of circle. You can use `Math.PI` for value of PI.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="380"] class AreaOfCircle { public static void main(String args[]) { int radius = 5; //Area of a circle can be calculated using PI(R Squared) double area = _____\_\_; System.out.println("Area of the circle is "+area); //Area of a circle can be calculated using the formula 2PIr double circumference = \_\___\_\_; System.out.println("Circumference of the circle is "+circumference); //Assign the rounded value of circumference to roundedCircumference double roundedCircumference = \_\_____; System.out.println("Circumference of the circle after rounding is "+roundedCircumference); } } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] class AreaOfCircle { public static void main(String args[]) { int radius = 5; //Area of a circle can be calculated using PI(R Squared) double area = Math.PI * radius * radius ; System.out.println("Area of the circle is "+area); //Area of a circle can be calculated using the formula 2PIr double circumference = 2 * Math.PI * radius ; System.out.println("Circumference of the circle is "+circumference); //Assign the rounded value of circumference to roundedCircumference double roundedCircumference = Math.round(circumference); System.out.println("Circumference of the circle after rounding is "+roundedCircumference); } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **1\.4 Conversion between Integer and String** </br> Sometimes you will need to turn a number into a string.In those instances you will use the **toString()** method of the Integer class. Here’s an example: </br> [code language="java"] int number = 20; String numberAsString = Integer.toString(number); [/code] </br> Similary the strings can also be converted into numbers. The `parseInt()` function of the Integer class converts the String object to **int**. </br> [code language="java"] String numberAsString = "100" int number = Integer.parseInt(numberAsString); [/code] </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="250"] public class NumStringConversion { public static void main(String args[]) { int number = 128; //Convert variable 'number' to a string String numberAsString = Integer.toString(number); System.out.println("Value of number as string is "+numberAsString); //Convert string numberAsString back to a number number = Integer.parseInt(numberAsString); System.out.println("Value of number is "+number); } } [/playground] [su_divider] 
## 2\. Flow Control

**2\.1 Boolean Values and Logical Operators **   
Sometimes , you will need a data type that can only have one of two values, like True/False. Java has Boolean data type to accomplish this. When operators like **>** or** <** used when comparing the number , the result is a boolean variable.In the boolean type, there are only two possible values: true and false. We can have variables and expressions of type boolean, just has we have variables and expressions of type int and double. A boolean variable is only capable of storing either the value true or the value false   
  
**Logical Operators : ** There are also some operations that can be applied to Boolean values themselves. Java supports six logical operators.   
  
The **&&** operator represents logical and. It is a binary operator, and its result is true only if both the values given to it are true.   
  
The **||** operator denotes logical or. It produces true if either of the values given to it is true.   
  
Logical **not(!)** is a unary operator that flips the value given to it—!true produces false and !false gives true.   
  
The **^** operator denotes logical XOR.It produces true only if both values are different.   
Other two logical operators are **& (Non short circuiting AND)** , **| (Non short circuiting OR)**. Find out more about these operators from this [Stackoverflow answer][1]   
  
Demo of logical operators   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="380"] public class BooleanValues { public static void main(String args[]){ //Two boolean variable on and off are defined with boolean booleaniables true and false boolean on = true; boolean off = false; System.out.println(on); System.out.println(off); //Using comparator operators System.out.println(3 > 2); System.out.println(3 < 2); //Using logical operators System.out.println(on && off); System.out.println(off || on); System.out.println(!on); System.out.println(on^off); } } [/playground] [su_divider] **2\.2 If Statement** </br> To write useful programs, we almost always need to check conditions and change the behavior of the program accordingly. Conditional statements give us this ability. The simplest form is the **if** statement: </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="180"] public class IfDemo { public static void main(String args[]) { int x = 10; if (x > 0) { System.out.println(x+" is positive"); } } } [/playground] </br> The expression in parentheses is called the condition. If it is true, then the statements in brackets get executed. If the condition is not true, nothing happens.The condition can contain any of the comparison operators, sometimes called relational operators: </br> [code language="java"] x == y // x equals y x != y // x is not equal to y x > y // x is greater than y x < y // x is less than y x >= y // x is greater than or equal to y x <= y // x is less than or equal to y [/code] </br> ** Alternative execution with 'else'** </br> A second form of conditional execution is alternative execution, in which there are two possibilities, and the condition determines which one gets executed. The syntax looks like: </br> [code language="java"] public class ElseDemo { public static void main(String args[]) { String name = "apple"; //If condition checks if the first character of the 'name' is an vowel. //If first character of the 'name' is vowel , An is appended to 'name' and printed. if ("AaEeIiOoUu".indexOf(name.charAt(0)) > -1) { System.out.println("An "+name); } else { System.out.println(name); } } } [/code] </br> If condition checks if the first character of the `name` is an vowel.If first character of the `name` is vowel , **An** is appended to the `name` and printed. If not(else) , 'name' is printed alone. </br> </br> ** Chained conditionals:** </br> Sometimes you want to check for a number of related conditions and choose one of several actions. One way to do this is by chaining a series of **if's** and **elses**: </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="270"] public class PositiveOrNegative { public static void main(String args[]) { int x = 10; if (x > 0) { System.out.println("x is positive"); } else if (x < 0) { System.out.println("x is negative"); } else { System.out.println("x is zero"); } } } [/playground] These chains can be as long as you want, although they can be difficult to read if they get out of hand </br> </br> ** Nested conditionals:** </br> In addition to chaining, you can also nest one conditional within another. We could have written the previous example as </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="270"] public class PositiveOrNegative { public static void main(String args[]) { int x = 10; if (x > 0) { System.out.println("x is positive"); } else if (x < 0) { System.out.println("x is negative"); } else { System.out.println("x is zero"); } } } [/playground] </br> There is now an outer conditional that contains two branches. The first branch contains a simple print statement, but the second branch contains another conditional statement, which has two branches of its own. Those two branches are both print statements, but they could have been conditional statements as well. </br></br> **Challenge 1: **   
Complete the below code to compare two numbers num1 and num2 using chained conditionals. [playground] public class CompareNumbers { public static void main(String args[]) { //Assign values to num1 and num2 int num1 = 10; int num2 = 15; if(____ > __\_\_) { System.out.println("The larger of "+ num1+ " and "+ num2+ " is "+ num1+ "."); } else if(\_\___ > ____) { System.out.println("The larger of "+ num1+" and "+ num2+ " is "+ num2+ "."); } else { System.out.println("The values "+ num1+ " and "+num2+ " are equal."); } } } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class CompareNumbers { public static void main(String args[]) { //Assign values to num1 and num2 int num1 = 10; int num2 = 15; if(num1 > num2) { System.out.println("The larger of "+ num1+ " and "+ num2+ " is "+ num1+ "."); } else if(num2>num1) { System.out.println("The larger of "+ num1+" and "+ num2+ " is "+ num2+ "."); } else { System.out.println("The values "+ num1+ " and "+num2+ " are equal."); } } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] **Challenge 2: ** Complete the below code snippet to print the grade on following criteria :   
<div style="padding-left: 100px">
  Range : Grade<br /> <60 : F<br /> <70 : D<br /> <80 : C<br /> <90 : B<br /> <=100 : A <br />
</div> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="380"] public class Grade { public static void main(String args[]) { int mark = 85; //Use if condition to compute the grade if (mark < 60){ System.out.println("Grade : F"); } else if (__\_\_) { System.out.println("Grade : D"); } else if (\_\_\_\_) { System.out.println("Grade : C"); } else if (\_\_\_\_) { System.out.println("Grade : B"); } else if (\_\___) { System.out.println("Grade : A"); } } } [/playground] 

  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class Grade { public static void main(String args[]) { int mark = 85; //Use if condition to compute the grade if (mark < 60){ System.out.println("Grade : F"); } else if (mark < 70) { System.out.println("Grade : D"); } else if (mark < 80) { System.out.println("Grade : C"); } else if (mark < 90) { System.out.println("Grade : B"); } else if (mark < 100) { System.out.println("Grade : A"); } } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] **2\.3 For loop**   
For loops allow you to repeatedly run a block of code a certain number of times.   
The general syntax of **for **loops like this: [code language="java"] for (INITIALIZER; CONDITION; INCREMENTOR) { BODY } */ [/code] [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="170"] public class ForDemo { public static void main(String args[]) { //Example : This is easier to read for (int i = 0; i <= 10; i++) { System.out.println(i); } } } [/playground]   
The first part, **`int i = 0`**, is run once at the beginning of the loop. The variable i is used to track how many times the loop has run.   
  
The second part, **`i < 10`**, is checked at the beginning of every loop iteration before running the code inside the loop. If the statement is true, the code inside the loop is executed. If it is false, then the loop is complete. The statement**` i < 10;` **indicates that the loop will continue as long as 'i' is less than 10.   
  
The final part, **`i++`**, is executed at the end of every loop. This increases the variable **i** by 1 after each loop. Once **i** reaches 10, the loop will exit.   
Program to print stars in the following format for n rows   
*   
**   
***   
****   
for n times   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="400"] public class Stars { public static void main(String args[]) { int numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(int currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ // * is appended to the intiable stars for every iteration String stars = ""; //The number of stars in each row is same the the row number for(int numStars = 1 ; numStars <= currentRow ; numStars++) { stars = stars + '*'; } //to print new line System.out.println(stars); } } } [/playground]   
**Challenge: **   
Print multiplication table for a provided number **num ** [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="360"] public class MultiplicationTable { public static void main(String args[]) { int num = 5; //numRows specifies the number of rows in the multiplication table int numRows = 10; int result; //Run the loop from 0 to numRows for(int currentRow = 0 ; ____ ; __\_\_++ ) { //Print the result in a below format. //5 * 1 = 5 //5 * 2 = 10 System.out.println(\_\_+" * "+\_\_+" = "+(\_\_)); } } } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class MultiplicationTable { public static void main(String args[]) { int num = 5; //numRows specifies the number of rows in the multiplication table int numRows = 10; int result; //Run the loop from 0 to numRows for(int currentRow = 0 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++ ) { //Print the result in a below format. //5 * 1 = 5 //5 * 2 = 10 System.out.println(num+" * "+currentRow+" = "+(num*currentRow)); } } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] [su_divider] **2\.4 While and Do loops** </br> Looping control flow allows us to go back to some point in the program where we were before and repeat it with our current program state. Two more ways to loop instead of using `for` is using `while` or `do` Printing numbers from 1 to 10 using while loop.   
</br> Using a while statement, we can rewrite countdown: </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="180"] public class WhileDemo { public static void main(String args[]) { int n = 1; while (n <= 10) { System.out.println(n); n = n+1; } } } [/playground] </br> What this means is, “While **n** is less than 10, print the value of **n** and then increase the value of** n** by 1. </br></br> **More formally, the flow of execution for a while statement is as follows:** 
1.  Evaluate the condition in parentheses, yielding true or false.
2.  If the condition is false, exit the while statement and continue execution at the next statement.
3.  If the condition is true, execute the statements between the squigglybrackets,and then go back to step 1

  
This type of flow is called a **loop** because the third step loops back around to the top. The statements inside the loop are called the body of the loop. If the condition is false the first time through the loop, the statements inside the loop are never executed.The body of the loop should change the value of one or more variables so that, eventually, the condition becomes false and the loop terminates. Otherwise the loop will repeat forever, which is called an infinite loop.   
  
The do while loop is a control structure similar to the while loop. It differs only on one point: a do loop always executes its body at least once, and it starts testing whether it should stop only after that first execution   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="180"] public class DoWhileDemo { public static void main(String args[]) { int n = 1; do{ System.out.println(n); n = n+1; }while (n <= 10); } } [/playground]   
While loop to print all even numbers between 0 and **maxNum **   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="340"] public class EvenNumbers { public static void main(String args[]) { //initialize currentNum with zero int currentNum = 0; int maxNum = 40; //Even number between 0 and maxNum to be printed while (currentNum <= maxNum) { //If the reminder of 'i/2' is zero , then its even if(currentNum%2 == 0) { System.out.println(currentNum); } //Increment the value of currentNum currentNum++; } } } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge: **   
Find sum of multiple of 3 and 5 between 0 and **maxNum **   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="400"] public class SumOfMultiples { public static void main(String args[]) { int maxNum = 100; //Initially the sum is zero int sum = 0; int currentNum = 1; //While loop while (currentNum < maxNum) { //Check if currentNum is a multiple of both 3 and 5 in below 'if' condition if(____\_\_) { //If 'currentNum' is multiple of both 3 and 5 , then add it to 'sum' sum = \_\____; } currentNum++; } System.out.println("The sum of numbers that are multiples of 3 and 5 under " +maxNum+" is "+sum); } } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class SumOfMultiples { public static void main(String args[]) { int maxNum = 100; //Initially the sum is zero int sum = 0; int currentNum = 1; //While loop while (currentNum < maxNum) { //Check if currentNum is a multiple of both 3 and 5 in below 'if' condition if(currentNum % 3 == 0 && currentNum % 5 == 0) { //If 'currentNum' is multiple of both 3 and 5 , then add it to 'sum' sum = sum + currentNum; } currentNum++; } System.out.println("The sum of numbers that are multiples of 3 and 5 under " +maxNum+" is "+sum); } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] 
## Arrays

**3\.1 Array Basics** </br> An array is a set of values where each value is identified by an index. You can make an array of ints, doubles, or any other type, but all the values in an array have to have the same type. </br> Syntactically, array types look like other Java types except they are followed by []. For example, **int[]** is the type “array of integers” and **double[]** is the type “array of doubles.” You can declare variables with these types in the usual ways: </br> [code language="java"] int[] count; double[] value; //Initialize count = new int[4]; values = new double[size]; [/code] </br> To store values in the array, use the [] operator. For example **count[0]** refers to the “zeroeth” element of the array, and **count[1]** refers to the “oneth” element. You can use the [] operator anywhere in an expression: [code language="java"] count[0] = 7; count[1] = count[0] * 2; count[2]++; count[3] -= 60; //Looping through array elements //This is a standard while loop that counts from 0 up to 4 int i = 0; while (i < 4) { System.out.println(count[i]); i++; } [/code] </br> **Array length** </br> All arrays have one named instance variable: **length**. Not surprisingly, it contains the length of the array (number of elements). It is a good idea to use this value as the upper bound of a loop, rather than a constant value. That way, if the size of the array changes, you won’t have to go through the program changing all the loops; they will work correctly for any size array.Find out more about Instance variables in the section 5. </br> [playground] public class ArrayIterate { public static void main(String args[]) { //Declare array String[] studentNames; //Initialize studentNames = new String[3]; studentNames[0] = "John"; studentNames[1] = "Linda"; studentNames[2] = "Joe"; //Iterate over the array for(int i = 0 ; i < studentNames.length ; i++) { System.out.println(studentNames[i]); } } } [/playground] </br> The last time the body of the loop gets executed, **i** is **studentNames.length - 1**, which is the index of the last element. When **i** is equal to **studentNames.length**, the condition fails and the body is not executed.   
**Challenge: **   
Reverse the elements of tha array **var **into the destination array **reverseVar**   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="380"] import java.util.Arrays; //Reverse the elements in the array var and place in the array reverseVar class Hello { public static void main(String[] args) { System.out.println("Declare and initialize an array"); int var[]=new int[5]; for(int i = 0 ; i < var.length ; i ++ ) { var[i] = i; } System.out.println(Arrays.toString(var)); int reverseVar[] = new int[5]; for(int i = 0 ; i < _____ ; i ++) { //Corresponding element form end in the var array reverseVar[i] = var[____-i-1]; } System.out.println(Arrays.toString(reverseVar)); } } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] import java.util.Arrays; //Reverse the elements in the array var and place in the array reverseVar class Hello { public static void main(String[] args) { System.out.println("Declare and initialize an array"); int var[]=new int[5]; for(int i = 0 ; i < var.length ; i ++ ) { var[i] = i; } System.out.println(Arrays.toString(var)); int reverseVar[] = new int[5]; for(int i = 0 ; i < reverseVar.length ; i ++) { //Corresponding element form end in the var array reverseVar[i] = var[var.length-i-1]; } System.out.println(Arrays.toString(reverseVar)); } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **3\.2 Multi Dimentional Arrays **   
The arrays you have been using so far have only held one column of data. But you can set up an array to hold more than one column. These are called multi-dimensional arrays   
[code language="java"] int[ ][ ] studentFullName = new int\[6\]\[5\]; [/code]   
They are set up in the same way as a normal array, except you have two sets of square brackets. The first set of square brackets is for the rows and the second set of square brackets is for the columns. In the above line of code, we're telling Java to set up an array with 6 rows and 5 columns. To hold values in a multi-dimensional array you have to take care to track the rows and columns. Here's some code to fill the two dimensional array with first name and last name of students.   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="420"] public class MultiDimensionalArrays { public static void main(String args[]) { String[ ][ ] studentFullName = new String\[3\]\[3\]; studentFullName\[0\]\[0\] = "James"; studentFullName\[0\]\[1\] = "Smith"; studentFullName\[1\]\[0\] = "Maria"; studentFullName\[1\]\[1\] = "Garcia"; studentFullName\[2\]\[0\] = "Michael" ; studentFullName\[2\]\[1\] = "Johnson" ; //Printing all the first names. System.out.println("First names are:") for(int i = 0 ; i < studentFullName.length ; i++) { System.out.println(studentFullName\[i\]\[0\]); } //Printing all the last names. System.out.println("Last names are:") for(int i = 0 ; i < studentFullName.length ; i++) { System.out.println(studentFullName\[i\]\[1\]); } } } [/playground]   
[su_divider] 
## Functions

**4\.1 Functions basics** </br> A function is a block of code that takes input, processes that input, and then produces output.A function is composed of a sequence of statements called the function body. Values can be passed to a function, and the function may return a value. Functions can be called any number of times and this makes the code resusable. We have already seen one function definition: **main**. The method named main is special, but the syntax is the same for other methods: </br> [code language="java"] public static void NAME( LIST OF PARAMETERS ) { STATEMENTS } [/code] </br> You can make up any name you want for your function, except that you can’t call it **main** or any Java keyword.   
[code language="java"] public static void newLine() { System.out.println(""); } [/code]   
  
The list of parameters specifies what information, if any, you have to provide to use (or invoke) the new method. In this example the parameter 'num' is passed to the function isEven. Find more about the function parameters and arguements in the section 4.2   
`isEven` accept's an integer as parameter and returns boolean `true` if the number is even , else returns `false` [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="320"] public class EvenOrOdd { public static void main(String args[]) { //Calling isEven function. System.out.println(isEven(5)); System.out.println(isEven(10)); } //Function to check if the provided number is even or not public static boolean isEven(int num) { if(num%2 == 0) { return true; } else { return false; } } } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge: ** Program to print stars in the following format for n rows   
*   
**   
***   
****   
**getStarsString()** takes **currentRow **as a parameter and returns the string containing **currentRow **number of stars.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="330"] public class StartsWithFunction { public static void main(String args[]) { int numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(int currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ //Call the function getStarsString() with currentRow String stars = getStarsString(currentRow); //to print new line System.out.println(stars); } } public static String getStarsString(int currentRow) { //The number of stars in each row is same the the row number String stars = ""; //For loop to add stars __________; return stars; } } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class StartsWithFunction { public static void main(String args[]) { int numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(int currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ //Call the function getStarsString() with currentRow String stars = getStarsString(currentRow); //to print new line System.out.println(stars); } } public static String getStarsString(int currentRow) { //The number of stars in each row is same the the row number String stars = ""; for(int numStars = 1 ; numStars <= currentRow ; numStars++) { stars = stars + '*'; } return stars; } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **4\.2 Function Parameters** </br> Some of the methods we have used require arguments, which are values that you provide when you invoke the method. To print a string, you have to provide the string, so `println` takes a String as an argument. </br> When you use a method, you provide arguments. When you write a method, you specify a list of parameters. A parameter is a variable that stores an argument. The parameter list indicates what arguments are required. </br> [code language="java"] //Here 's' is a single parameter of type String class MethodArgumentsParameters { public static void printTwice(String s) { System.out.println(s); System.out.println(s); printTwice("Dont make me say this twice!"); } public static void main(String[] args) { //Single argument of type String is provided printTwice("Don't make me say this twice!"); } } [/code] ** Methods that return values **   
[code language="java"] //int is the type of return value. public int square(int num) { //Returns the square of num return num*num; } int value = square(4); //Now the 'value' is 16 value = square(5); // Now the 'value' is 25 [/code] </br> In the above example ,the **num **is passed to function** square()**. This function computes the **square() **of the **num **and returns it back.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="280"] public class StudentWithMarks { public static void main(String args[]) { //Call function 'studentMarks' by providing the parameters studentMarks("John",60,"Maths"); studentMarks("Linda",90,"English"); } //'studentMarks' function accepts three parameters public static void studentMarks(String studentName , int marks, String course) { //All the three parameters are used in this print statement. System.out.println( studentName + " got "+marks+" in "+course); } } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge: ** Complete the below code to find the total number of **A **grades from the array **studentsWithGrade**. This array holds Student name along with his grade.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="600"] public class FindNoOfAGrades { public static void main(String args[]) { String[][] studentsWithGrade; studentsWithGrade = new String\[3\]\[2\]; //Student1 studentsWithGrade\[0\]\[0\] = "John"; studentsWithGrade\[0\]\[1\] = "A"; //Student2 studentsWithGrade\[1\]\[0\] = "Linda"; studentsWithGrade\[1\]\[1\] = "A"; //Student3 studentsWithGrade\[2\]\[0\] = "Sam"; studentsWithGrade\[2\]\[1\] = "B"; System.out.println("Number of students with grade 'A' are : " +findNoOfAGrades(studentsWithGrade)); } public static int findNoOfAGrades(String[][] studentsWithGrade) { int noOfAGrades = 0; //Iterate over the array studentsWithGrade for(_____ ) { //Check if the grade of this student is A if(____) { noOfAGrades++; } } return noOfAGrades; } } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="java"] public class FindNoOfAGrades { public static void main(String args[]) { String[][] studentsWithGrade; studentsWithGrade = new String\[3\]\[2\]; //Student1 studentsWithGrade\[0\]\[0\] = "John"; studentsWithGrade\[0\]\[1\] = "A"; //Student2 studentsWithGrade\[1\]\[0\] = "Linda"; studentsWithGrade\[1\]\[1\] = "A"; //Student3 studentsWithGrade\[2\]\[0\] = "Sam"; studentsWithGrade\[2\]\[1\] = "B"; System.out.println("Number of students with grade 'A' are : " +findNoOfAGrades(studentsWithGrade)); } public static int findNoOfAGrades(String[][] studentsWithGrade) { int noOfAGrades = 0; //Iterate over the array studentsWithGrade for(int i = 0 ; i < studentsWithGrade.length ; i++ ) { //Check if the grade of this student is A if(studentsWithGrade\[i\]\[1\] == "A") { noOfAGrades++; } } return noOfAGrades; } } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **4\.3  Arrays and Functions **   
**The Arrays Class:**Java contains a special utility class that makes it easier for you to perform many often used array operations like copying and sorting arrays, filling in data, searching in arrays etc. The utility class is called Arrays and is located in the standard Java package java.util.   
  
**toString(): ** You can convert an Java array of primitive types to a String using the Arrays.toString() method. This can be a convinient way to print th elements of array , instead of printing using a loop </br> [playground] import java.util.Arrays; public class ArrayToString { public static void main(String args[]) { int[] ints = new int[10]; //Initialize array for(int i=0; i < ints.length; i++){ ints[i] = i; } //Converted to string. System.out.println("The string after conversion is : "+Arrays.toString(ints)); } } [/playground] </br> **Copying Arrays: ** One of the method to copy a Java array is to use the **Arrays.copyOf()** method. </br> The `Arrays.copyOf()` method takes 2 parameters. The first parameter is the array to copy. The second parameter is the length of the new array. This parameter can be used to specify how many elements from the source array to copy. </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="500"] import java.util.Arrays; public class CopyArray { public static void main(String args[]) { int[] source = new int[10]; //Initialize source array for(int i=0; i < source.length; i++) { source[i] = i; } System.out.println("Source array is :"+Arrays.toString(source)); //copy to destination array int[] destination = Arrays.copyOf(source, source.length); System.out.println("destination array is :"+Arrays.toString(destination)); //copy to destinationTrimmed array , but only first 5 elements int[] destinationTrimmed = Arrays.copyOf(source, 5); System.out.println("destinationTrimmed array after copying 5 elements :"+Arrays.toString(destinationTrimmed)); } } [/playground] </br> </br> **sort(): ** You can sort the elements of an array using the **Arrays.sort()** method. Sorting the elements of an array rearranges the order of the elements according to their sort order. Here is an **Arrays.sort()** example: </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="320"] import java.util.Arrays; public class ArraySort { public static void main(String args[]) { int[] ints = new int[10]; //Initialize the array for(int i=0; i < ints.length; i++){ ints[i] = 10 - i; } //Convert to String an print it System.out.println("Original Array is: "+Arrays.toString(ints)); //Sort the elements of array java.util.Arrays.sort(ints); //Convert the sorted array to String an print it System.out.println("Sorted Array is: "+Arrays.toString(ints)); } } [/playground] [su_divider] 
## 5\.Classes and Objects</br> 

**5\.1 Class declrations and methods:**   
A class definition is like a template for objects: it determines what instance variables the objects have and what methods can operate on them. 
1.  Defining a new class also creates a new object type with the same name. 
2.  Every object belongs to some object type; that is, it is an instance of some class. 
3.  When you invoke new to create an object, Java invokes a special method called a constructor to initialize the instance variables. You provide one or more constructors as part of the class definition.  Syntax for creating a Class. [code language="java"] class CLASSNAME { int variable1; String variable2; public void function1 (String[] args) { STATEMENTS } public void function2 (String[] args) { STATEMENTS } } [/code] In the above code , 'variable1' and 'variable2' are instance variables. Each object of the class holds their own copy of instance variables. 

  
  
**Constructors: **Constructors initialize instance variables. The syntax for constructors is similar to that of other methods, with three exceptions: 
1.  The name of the constructor is the same as the name of the class. 
2.  Constructors have no return type and no return value. 
3.  The keyword static is omitted.  [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="520"] public class Student { //Instance variables String firstName; String lastName; int marks; //Constructor Student(String first,String last,int score) { firstName = first; lastName = last; marks = score; } public String getFullName() { return firstName +" "+lastName; } public static void main(String args[]) { Student student1 = new Student("John","Smith",90); System.out.println("Full name of student1 is "+student1.getFullName()); Student student2 = new Student("Linda","Smith",40); System.out.println("Full name of student2 is "+student2.getFullName()); } } [/playground] [su_divider] 

**5\.2 Method overloading **   
Method Overloading is a feature that allows a class to have two or more methods having same name, if their parameter lists are different. ie. Having more than one method with the same name in a same class,is called overloading,is legal in Java as long as each version takes different parameters. [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="530"] public class Student { //Instance variables String firstName; String lastName; int marks; //Constructor Student(String first,String last,int score) { firstName = first; lastName = last; marks = score; } //No parameters public String getFullName() { return firstName +" "+lastName; } //One String parameter public String getFullName(String message) { return message+" "+firstName +" "+lastName; } public static void main(String args[]) { Student student1 = new Student("John","Smith",90); System.out.println(student1.getFullName()); System.out.println(student1.getFullName("Hello")); } } [/playground]   
In the above example , ** getFullName() ** is overloaded. [code language="java"] student1.getFullName() => Calls getFullName() student1.getFullName("Hello") => invokes getFullName(String message) [/code] [su_divider] **5\.3 Scope**   
The scope of a variable is the part of the program over which the variable name can be referenced.   
Variables can be declared in several different places. 
1.  In a class body as class fields. Variables declared here are referred to as class-level variables. 
2.  As parameters of a method or constructor. 
3.  In a method's body or a constructor's body. 
4.  Within a statement block, such as inside a while or for block.  [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="400"] public class Scope { //Variable totalNoOfStudents has Class level scope //It can be accessed in any static method of the class static int totalNoOfStudents = 60; public static void main(String[] args) { System.out.println("value of totalNoOfStudents is "+totalNoOfStudents); //Variable firstName has the method level scope //This variable can be accessed form anywhere in the method String firstName = "John"; System.out.println(firstName); for (int x = 0; x < 5; x++) { //Variable x has block level scope //It can only be accessed in this for System.out.println(x); System.out.println(firstName); } } } [/playground] 

**5\.4 Inheritance**   
Inheritance is the ability to define a new class that is a modified version of an existing class. Extending the metaphor, the existing class is sometimes called the parent class and the new class is called the child.   
The primary advantage of this feature is that you can add methods and instance variables without modifying the parent [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="950"] class InheritenceDemo { static class Person { String firstName; String lastName; Person(String firstName,String lastName) { this.firstName = firstName; this.lastName = lastName; } String getFullName() { return this.firstName + this.lastName; } } //Inheriting Person using extends keyword static class Student extends Person { String studentId; int marks; //Constructor Student(String firstName,String lastName,String studentId,int score) { //Call the constructor of parent class to assign firstName and lastName super(firstName,lastName); this.studentId = studentId; marks = score; } // new method defined in this class String getNameWithStudentid() { return super.getFullName() + "(" +this.studentId + ")"; } } public static void main(String args[]) { Person person1 = new Person("John","Smith"); System.out.println(person1.getFullName()); Student student1 = new Student("Linda","Smith","AA12",45); System.out.println(student1.getNameWithStudentid()); } } [/playground]

 [1]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/9264897/reason-for-the-exsistance-of-non-short-circuit-logical-operators
