---
ID: 203
post_title: Javascript 101
author: snippet java
post_date: 2016-10-03 13:53:46
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: http://watsonbeach.com/js-101/
published: true
---
## Section 1 : Basic Javascript 

**Before we begin:**   
This course uses **live code** technology. It will allow you to experiment and learn a new language very quickly without using any compilers or additional tools. We will also be testing you at the end of each learning module.   
  
Click the **Run** button to see results.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="50"] console.log("Hello world") [/playground] [su_divider] **1\.1 Variables and Strings** </br> A variable is a name that can reference a specific value. Variables are declared using **`var`** followed by the variable's name. </br> Here's an example: </br> [code language="javascript"]var example;[/code] </br> The above variable is declared, but it isn't defined (it does not yet reference a specific value). </br> Here's an example of defining a variable, making it reference a specific value: [code language="javascript"]var example = 'some string';[/code] </br> A string is a sequence of characters.Examples of characters are letters, numbers, punctuation marks, and spaces.String values are surrounded by either single or double quotation marks. </br> [code language="javascript"] 'this is a string' "this is also a string" [/code] </br> Now let us try to add the strings and print the result   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="220"] //The '+' operator can be used to add (concatenate) strings. var string1 = "Hello "; var string2 = "world!"; var result1 = string1 + string2; console.log("result1 is "+result1); //Using concat() method on string variable to join two strings var string3 = "Hello "; var string4 = "world!"; var result2 = string3.concat(string4); console.log("result2 is "+result2); [/playground]   
  
**Challenge:** </br>Assign your **first name** and **last name** to the variables `firstName` and `LastName`.Then print the variable `fullName` </br> [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="220"] //Assign your first name var firstName = ____ ; console.log("firstName :" + firstName); //Assign your last name var lastName = ____ ; console.log("lastName :" + lastName); //Join firstName and lastName and print it. var fullName = ________________; console.log("fullName :" + fullName); [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] //Assign your first name var firstName = 'James' ; console.log("firstName :" + firstName); //Assign your last name var lastName ='Bond' ; console.log("lastName :" + lastName); //Join firstName and lastName and print it. var fullName = firstName+lastName; console.log("lastName :" + fullName); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **1\.2 String Properties and Methods**   
You will often need to know how many characters are in a string.For this you will use the **`.length`** property. Here's an example:   
[code language="javascript"] var example = 'example string'; example.length [/code]   
You will also often need to change the contents of a string.Strings have built-in functionality that allow you to inspect and manipulate their contents.Here is an example using the .**`replace()`** method: [code language="javascript"] var example = 'Allen Outlaw'; var newExample = example.replace("Outlaw","Smith"); //Now the value of newExample is "Allen Smith" [/code]   
  
One can use Regular Expressions to match and replace patterns, but this is a vast topic and beyond scope of this introductory tutorial. Please refer to [w3 Schools][1] for more details   
  
The **charAt()** method returns the specified character from a string.Index is passed as parameter to the **charAt()** method. [code language="javascript"] var studentName = "Linda" studentName.charAt(0); // First character 'L' is returned studentName.charAt(3); // Fourth character 'd' is retruned [/code]   
  
The **substring()** returns a subset of a string between one index and another, or through the end of the string. [code language="javascript"] var studentName = "Linda" studentName.substring(0, 3); // returns 'Lin'. End index is not included studentName.substring(3); // returns 'da'. If End index is not passed, the string from start index to end will be returned [/code]   
  
The **indexOf()** method returns the index within the calling String object of the first occurrence of the specified value [code language="javascript"] var studentName = "Linda" studentName.indexOf('L'); // returns 0 studentName.substring('ind'); // returns 1 studentName.substring('e');//returns -1 [/code]   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="620"] var example = 'Mr Blue has a blue house and a blue car'; console.log("Example: "+example); //Now we are replacing the part of String result1 = example.replace('house', 'boat'); console.log("result1: "+result1); //One can user advanced regular expressions with options //Now we are replacing all the case sensitive 'blue' result2 = example.replace(/blue/g, "red"); // '/g' means global which replaces every instance. console.log("result2: "+result2); //Now we are replacing all the case insensitive 'blue' result3 = example.replace(/blue/gi, "red"); console.log("result3: "+result3); //Using charAt() console.log("First character in 'example' is :"+example.charAt(0)); console.log("Fourth character in 'example' is :"+example.charAt(4)); console.log("Last character in 'example' is :"+example.charAt(example.length-1)); //Using Substring. //From 1st character to 4th character console.log("Substring from first to fourth character "+example.substring(0,5)); //End index is not provied console.log("Substring from fourth character to the end"+example.substring(5)); //Start index is bigger than End index. //In these cases , the behaviour is similar to swapping the start and end indexes console.log("Substring from first to fourth character "+example.substring(5,0)); //Using indexOf() method. console.log("First occurance of 'r' at :"+example.indexOf("r")); //First occurance of 'r' console.log("First occurance of 'Blue' at :"+example.indexOf("Blue")); console.log("First occurance of 'Green' at :"+example.indexOf("Green"));//Green is not part of 'example' [/playground]   
  
**Challenge:**   
A variable **sentence** is defined with **James likes Maths class**</code>. Change the value of **sentence** to **James likes English class**   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] var sentence = "James likes Maths class"; //Change the order to "James likes English class" sentence = ____\_\_; console.log(sentence); //assign length with the length of the new order string. var length = \_\___; console.log("Length of 'sentence' is: "+length); [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var sentence = "James likes Maths class"; //Change the order to "James likes English class" sentence = sentence.replace('Maths','English'); console.log(sentence); //assign length with the length of the new order string. var length = sentence.length; console.log("Length of 'sentence' is: "+length); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **1\.3 Numeric variables and operators**   
Numbers can be integers, like 2, 14, or 4353, or they can be decimals, also known as floats, like 3.14, 1.5, or 100.7893423. Unlike Strings, Numbers do not need to have quotes.   
**`Math.round()` **can be used to round a number to the nearest whole number.   
  
You can use Math library functions to perform additional mathemetical functions   
We can do basic math using familiar operators like +, -, *, /, and %.   
**Example** [code language="javascript"] var x = 100 + 50; //Value of x is 150 var x = (100 + 50) * 2; //Value of x is 300 var x = (100 - 50) / 2; //Value of x is 25 //add a number to itself var x = 25; x += 50; //Value of x is 75. //subtract a number from itself var x = 25; x -= 25; //Value of x is 0. //multiply a number by itself var x = 25; x *= 5; //Value of x is 125. //divide a number by itself var x = 25; x /= 5; //Value of x is 5. //increase a number variable by one var x = 10; x ++; //value of x is 11 //decrease a number variable by one var x = 10; x --; //value of x is 9 [/code]   
  
Converting celsius to fahrenheit using the operators   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="320"] var celsius = 100; //Using operators to convert from celsius to fahrenheit //To convert temperatures in degrees Celsius to Fahrenheit, multiply //by 1.8 (or 9/5) and add 32. var fahrenheit = celsius * 9 / 5 + 32; var message = celsius +' C is ' + fahrenheit + ' F.'; console.log(message); //To convert temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit to Celsius, subtract //32 and multiply by .5556 (or 5/9). // And back to celsius to validate the answer var fahrenheitToCelsius = (fahrenheit - 32) * 5 / 9; message = fahrenheit +' F is ' + fahrenheitToCelsius + ' C.'; console.log(message); [/playground]   
**Challenge:**   
The **`radius `**and **`pi `**are defined. Find the area and circumference of circle.   
You can use Math functions to perform additional mathematical. Please vist [W3 Schools][2]for more details   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="280"] var radius = 5; //Area of a circle can be calculated using PI(R Squared) var area = _____ ; console.log("Area of the circle is "+area); //Area of a circle can be calculated using the formula 2PIr var circumference = _____ ; console.log("Circumference of the circle is "+circumference); //Assign the rounded value of circumference to roundedCircumference var roundedCircumference = ___ console.log("Circumference of the circle after rounding the value is"+roundedCircumference); [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var radius = 5; //Area of a circle can be calculated using PI(R Squared) var area = Math.PI * radius * radius ; console.log("Area of the circle is "+area); //Area of a circle can be calculated using the formula 2PIr var circumference = 2 * Math.PI * radius ; console.log("Circumference of the circle is "+circumference); //Assign the rounded value of circumference to roundedCircumference var roundedCircumference = Math.round(circumference) console.log("Circumference of the circle after rounding the value is"+roundedCircumference); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **1\.4 Conversion between Strings and Numbers **   
Sometimes you will need to turn a number into a string.In those instances you will use the `<strong>toString()</strong>` method. Here's an example:   
[code language="javascript"] var i = 256; i = i.toString(); [/code]   
Similary the strings can also be converted into numbers.The `<strong>Number()</strong>` function converts the object parameter to a number that represents the object's value. If the value cannot be converted to a legal number, NaN is returned. [code language="javascript"] var str = "256"; var i = Number(str); [/code]   
  
This example illustrates the process of converting between String and numbers   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] var n = 128; //Convert variable 'n' to a string n = n.toString(); console.log(n); var str = "300" //Convert string variable to a number ans assign it to 'i' var i = Number(str); console.log(i); [/playground]   
[su_divider] 
## Section 2 : Flow Control 

**2\.1 Boolean Values and Logical Operators**   
Sometimes , you will need a data type that can only have one of two values, like**` True/False`**. JavaScript has Boolean data type to accomplish this.   
When operators like **> **or **<** used when comparing the number , the result is a boolean variable.   
  
**Logical Operators:** There are also some operations that can be applied to Boolean values themselves. JavaScript supports three logical operators: and, or, and not. These can be used to “reason” about Booleans.   
  
The **&&** operator represents logical and. It is a binary operator, and its result is true only if both the values given to it are true.   
  
The **||** operator denotes logical or. It produces true if either of the values given to it is true.   
Logical **not(!)** is a unary operator that flips the value given to it—!true produces false and !false gives true. [playground] //Two variable on and off are defined with boolean variables true and false var on = true; var off = false; console.log(on); console.log(off); //Using comparator operators console.log(3 > 2) console.log(3 < 2) //Using logical operators console.log(on && false) console.log(off || on) console.log(!on) [/playground]   
[su_divider] **2\.2 If Statement**   
Conditional statements are used to alter the control flow of a program, based on a specified boolean condition.   
A conditional statement looks like this:   
[code language="javascript"] if (n > 1) { console.log('the variable n is greater than 1.'); } else { console.log('the variable n is less than or equal to 1.'); } [/code]   
Inside parentheses you must enter a logic statement, meaning that the result of the statement is either true or false.The else block is optional and contains the code that will be executed if the statement is false.   
  
**Ternary operator** can be used instead of **if**.   
[code language="javascript"] Strucuture of ternary operator condition ? expr1 : expr2 If condition is true, the operator returns the value of expr1; otherwise, it returns the value of expr2. [/code] [playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] var x = 10; //Example (x>5)?console.log("x is greater than 5"):console.log("x is less than 5") x = 0; //Using ternary operator twice to check if the number is postive or negative or zero (x>0)?console.log("x is positive"):(x<0)?console.log("x is negative"):console.log("x is zero"); [/playground]   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] //Check if the value of x is positive , negative or zero. var x = 10; if (x > 0) { console.log("x is positive"); } else if (x < 0) { console.log("x is negative"); } else { console.log("x is zero"); } [/playground]   
  
** Challenge 1: **   
Complete the below code to compare two numbers **num1 **and **num2**.  
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="230"] //Assign values to num1 and num2 var num1 = __\_\_; var num2 = \_\_\_\_; if(\_\___ > ___\_\_) { console.log("The larger of "+ num1+ " and "+ num2+ " is "+ num1+ "."); } else if(\_\_\_\_>\_\__) { console.log("The larger of "+ num1+" and "+ num2+ " is "+ num2+ "."); } else { console.log("The values "+ num1+ " and "+num2+ " are equal."); } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] //Assign values to num1 and num2 var num1 = 10; var num2 = 15; if(num1 > num2) { console.log("The larger of "+ num1+ " and "+ num2+ " is "+ num1+ "."); } else if(num2>num1) { console.log("The larger of "+ num1+" and "+ num2+ " is "+ num2+ "."); } else { console.log("The values "+ num1+ " and "+num2+ " are equal."); } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
** Challenge 2: ** Complete the below code snippet to print the grade on following criteria :   
Range : Grade  
<60 : F  
<70 : D  
<80 : C  
<90 : B  
<=100 : A   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="300"] var mark = \_\_; //Use if condition to compute the grade if (mark < 60){ console.log("Grade : F"); } else if (\_\_) { console.log("Grade : D"); } else if (\_\_) { console.log("Grade : C"); } else if (\_\_) { console.log("Grade : B"); } else if (__) { console.log("Grade : A"); } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var mark = 85; //Use if condition to compute the grade if (mark < 60){ console.log("Grade : F"); } else if (mark < 70) { console.log("Grade : D"); } else if (mark < 80) { console.log("Grade : C"); } else if (mark < 90) { console.log("Grade : B"); } else if (mark < 100) { console.log("Grade : A"); } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **2\.3 For Loop**   
For loops allow you to repeatedly run a block of code a certain number of times. This for loop logs to the console ten times:   
[code language="javascript"] for (var i = 1; i <= 10; i++) { // log the numbers 1 through 10 console.log(i) } [/code]   
The first part, **`var i = 0`**, is run once at the beginning of the loop. The variable i is used to track how many times the loop has run.   
  
The second part, **`i < 10`**, is checked at the beginning of every loop iteration before running the code inside the loop. If the statement is true, the code inside the loop is executed. If it is false, then the loop is complete. The statement**` i < 10;` **indicates that the loop will continue as long as 'i' is less than 10.   
  
The final part, **`i++`**, is executed at the end of every loop. This increases the variable **i** by 1 after each loop. Once **i** reaches 10, the loop will exit.   
  
Program to print stars in the following format for **numRows** rows   
*   
**   
***   
****   
for **numRows** times   
  
[playground] var numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(var currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ // * is appended to the variable stars for every iteration var stars = ""; //The number of stars in each row is same the the row number for(var numStars = 1 ; numStars <= currentRow ; numStars++) { stars = stars + '*'; } //to print new line console.log(stars); } [/playground]   
**Challenge:**   
  
Print multiplication table for a provided number **num**   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="260"] var num = 5; //numRows specifies the number of rows in the multiplication table var numRows = 10; var result; //Run the loop from 0 to numRows for(var currentRow = 0 ; currentRow <= ___ ; ___ ) { //Print the result in a below format. //5 * 1 = 5 //5 * 2 = 10 console.log(\_\_+" * "+\_\_+" = "+(__)) } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var num = 5; //numRows specifies the number of rows in the multiplication table var numRows = 10; var result; //Run the loop from 0 to numRows for(var currentRow = 0 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++ ) { //Print the result in a below format. //5 * 1 = 5 //5 * 2 = 10 console.log(num+" * "+currentRow+" = "+(num*currentRow)) } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **2\.4 While and Do loops**   
Looping control flow allows us to go back to some point in the program where we were before and repeat it with our current program state. Two more ways to loop instead of using **for** is using **while** or **do**   
Printing numbers from 1 to 10 using while loop.   
[code language="javascript"] var num = 1; while (num <= 10) { console.log(i); num = num + 1; } [/code]   
The do loop is a control structure similar to the while loop. It differs only on one point: a do loop always executes its body at least once, and it starts testing whether it should stop only after that first execution   
[code language="javascript"] var num = 1; do { console.log(num); num = num + 1; } while(num<=10); [/code]   
Use while loop to print all even numbers between 0 and **maxNum**   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="260"] //initialize currentNum with zero var currentNum = 0; var maxNum = 40; //Even number between 0 and maxNum to be printed console.log("Prining all even numbers between 0 and "+maxNum) while (currentNum <= maxNum) { //If the reminder of 'i/2' is zero , then its even if(currentNum%2 == 0) { console.log(currentNum); } //Increment the value of currentNum currentNum++; } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge:**   
Find sum of multiple of 3 and 5 between 0 and **maxNum**   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="340"] var maxNum = 100; //Initially the sum is zero var sum = 0; var currentNum = 1; //While loop while (currentNum < maxNum) { //Check if currentNum is a multiple of both 3 and 5 in below 'if' condition if(\_\_) { //If 'currentNum' is multiple of both 3 and 5 , then add it to 'sum' sum = \_\__ ; } currentNum++; } console.log("The sum of numbers that are multiples of 3 and 5 under " +maxNum+" is "+sum); [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var maxNum = 100; //Initially the sum is zero var sum = 0; var currentNum = 1; //While loop while (currentNum < maxNum) { //Check if currentNum is a multiple of both 3 and 5 in below 'if' condition if(currentNum % 3 == 0 && currentNum % 5 == 0) { //If 'currentNum' is multiple of both 3 and 5 , then add it to 'sum' sum = sum + currentNum; } currentNum++; } console.log("The sum of numbers that are multiples of 3 and 5 under " +maxNum+" is "+sum); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] 
## Section 3 : Arrays 

**3\.1 Array Basics**   
An array is a list of values.**isArray()** method Checks whether an object is an array   
  
**Accessing Array Elements:** Array elements can be accessed through index number.   
Index number starts from zero to array's property length minus one.Array elements must be accessed through only using bracket notation.Dot notation is invalid.   
  
Each item in an array is identified by a number, starting at 0.So inside a for loop we would use the **i** variable inside the square brackets instead of directly using an integer.   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="380"] //Delcare and assign an array var students = ['John', 'Edward', 'Tim']; //Here we are checking 'somestring' is an array. console.log(Array.isArray('somestring')); //Here we are checking variable pets is an array. console.log(Array.isArray(students)); //Accessing array elements //Indexing starts with '0'. Accessing first element. console.log(students[0]); //Accessing second element console.log(students[1]); console.log("**Printing array elements using for loop**"); for(var i = 0 ; i < students.length ; i++) { //Print every element in the array. console.log(students[i]) } [/playground]   
  
**Challenge:**   
Use `console.log()` to print all the elements of the **students** array.   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="160"] //Make variable named students that references an array that contains three students var students = ['Jim', 'John', 'Tim'] console.log("Elements in student array are:") //Use for loop to print all the elements of array for(__\_\_) { console.log(\_\___) } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] //Make variable named students that references an array that contains three students var students = ['Jim', 'John', 'Tim'] console.log("Elements in student array are:") //Use for loop to print all the elements of array for(var i = 0 ; i < students.length ; i++) { console.log(students[i]) } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **3\.2 Array Properties and Methods**   
Arrays have different properties and methods. Some of the important properties and methods are demonstrated below.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="250"] var students = ['Alan', 'Joe', 'Lucy']; console.log("Length of original studens array: "+students.length); //Prints the length of array 'students' students.push('Kate'); //Add new element at the end of the array console.log("Length of students array after adding an element: "+students.length); //Prints the length of array 'students' students.pop();//Remove element at the end of the array console.log("After pop(): "+students); students.reverse();//Reverse the order of elements in the array console.log("After reverse(): "+students); students.sort(); //Sorts the elements of an array console.log("After sort(): "+students); [/playground]   
To find out more about array properties and methods refer [Mozilla's website][3]   
  
**Challenge:**   
Place the unique element from **students** array to **studentsUnique** array   
**Hint:** Use sort and then iterate over the sorted array to check for duplicates   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="400"] var students = ['Jim','John','Edward','Sully','John'] //Insert unique elements from 'students' to 'studentsUnique' array. //Approach used here is to first sort the 'students' array. //Then iterate over it , if the consicutive element are not equal , the push //the first element to the 'studentsUnique' //Sort the students array _____\_\_; var studentsUnique = []; for(var i = 0 ; i < students.length ; i++) { //Check the in-equality of consecutive array elements if (\_\___ ___ ___) { studentsUnique.push (students[i]); } } //Printing the elements in 'studentsUnique' array for verification conosole.log("Elements of the studentsUnique array") for(var i = 0 ; i < studentsUnique.length ; i++) { console.log(studentsUnique[i]); } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var students = ['Jim','John','Edward','Sully','John'] //Insert unique elements from 'students' to 'studentsUnique' array. //Approach used here is to first sort the 'students' array. //Then iterate over it , if the consicutive element are not equal , the push //the first element to the 'studentsUnique' //Sort the students array students.sort(); var studentsUnique = []; for(var i = 0 ; i < students.length ; i++) { //Check the in-equality of consecutive array elements if (students[i] !== students[i+1]) { studentsUnique.push (students[i]); } } //Printing the elements in 'studentsUnique' array for verification conosole.log("Elements of the studentsUnique array") for(var i = 0 ; i < studentsUnique.length ; i++) { console.log(studentsUnique[i]); } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
[su_divider] **3\.3 Multi Dimensional Arrays**   
Arrays in JavaScript can store any data type inside each element.So we can store an array in each element of **students **array.   
  
[code language="javascript"] var students = [ ['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68] ] [/code]   
  
You can refer to marks of berry by using **students\[0\]\[1\]** notation.   
In this case **students[0]** will refer to Betty , 80 and **students\[0\]\[1\]** will refer to mark 80 of betty   
  
[playground] //students is a multi dimensional array. var students = [['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68]]; var totalmarks = 0; //Iterate over students array for (var i=0; i < students.length; i++) { //Add marks form each student to totalmarks totalmarks += students\[i\]\[1\]; } //Calculate average marks by dividing total marks with length of students array var avgmarks = (totalmarks/students.length); console.log("Average Marks of all the students: " + avgmarks); [/playground]   
## Section 4 : Functions

**4\.1 Functions**   
  
A function is a block of code that takes input, processes that input, and then produces output.A function is composed of a sequence of statements called the function body. Values can be passed to a function, and the function will return a value. Functions can be called any number of times and this makes the code resusable.   
Here is an example:   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="280"] //Function to determine if the 'num' is even or odd function isEven(num) { if(num%2 == 0) { return true; } else { return false; } } //Call function isEven num = 10; console.log("is "+num+" even? "+ isEven(num)); num = 9; console.log("is "+num+" even? "+ isEven(num)); [/playground]   
  
  
**Challenge:**   
Program to print stars in the following format for **n** rows   
*   
**   
***   
****   
  
**getStars()** takes **noOfstars **as a parameter and returns the string containing **noOfstars **number of stars.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="340"] var numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(var currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ // * is appended to the variable stars for every iteration //call function getStars with suitable parameter console.log(_____\_\_); } //function accepts a number as parameter and returns the string of stars function getStars(noOfstars) { var starsString = ""; for(var i = 1 ; i <= \_\__ ; i++) { starsString = ____\_\_'; } return \_\______; } [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] var numRows = 10; //Printing the 'numRows' rows for(var currentRow = 1 ; currentRow <= numRows ; currentRow++){ // * is appended to the variable stars for every iteration //to print new line console.log(getStars(currentRow)); } //function accepts a number as parameter and returns the string of stars function getStars(noOfstars) { var starsString = ""; for(var i = 1 ; i <= noOfstars ; i++) { starsString = starsString + '*'; } return starsString; } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **4\.2 Function parameters**   
A function can be declared to receive any number of parameters. parameters can be from any type. An parameter could be a string, a number, an array, an object and even another function.   
Here is an example:   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="200"] //'studentMarks' function accepts three arguements function studentMarks (studentName,marks,subject) { //All the three parameters are used in this log statement. console.log(studentName + " got "+marks+" in "+subject); } //Call function 'studentMarks' by providing the parameters studentMarks("Anna",75,"Maths"); studentMarks("John",90,"Science"); [/playground] **Challenge:**   
The function **findAverageMarks()** accepts two dimensional arrays as the parameter. It returns the average marks obtained by the students.   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="340"] //students is a multi dimensional array. var students = [['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68]]; //Call the function 'findAverageMarks' with students array console.log(findAverageMarks(students)); function findAverageMarks(students) { var totalmarks = 0; //Iterate over students array for (___\_\_) { //Add marks form each student to totalmarks \_\__\_\_; } //Calculate average marks by dividing total marks with length of students array var avgmarks = \_\_____; return avgmarks } [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] //students is a multi dimensional array. //students is a multi dimensional array. var students = [['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68]]; console.log("Average marks of all the students is: "+findAverageMarks(students)); function findAverageMarks(students) { var totalmarks = 0; //Iterate over students array for (var i=0; i < students.length; i++) { //Add marks form each student to totalmarks totalmarks += students\[i\]\[1\]; } //Calculate average marks by dividing total marks with length of students array var avgmarks = (totalmarks/students.length); return avgmarks } [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
There can be missing parameter , while passing a function. Look at sectin 4.3 further details.   
  
[su_divider] **4\.3 Arrays and Functions**   
There are many ways to manipulate arrays.One common task is filtering arrays to only contain certain values.For this we can use the **.filter()** method.   
**forEach()** is designed to run a function on each indexed element in an array. Starting at **index[0]** a function will get called on **index[0], index[1], index[2],** etc   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="340"] var students = ['Jim', 'Jhon', 'James']; //filter is applied on students. console.log("Element of array students after filter is applied") var filtered = students.filter(function (student) { return (student !== 'James'); }); console.log(filtered) console.log("Using for each") var numbers = [35,45,90,80] function printNum(item) { console.log(item) } //forEach is used to call the function printNum on all the elements of the array 'numbers' numbers.forEach(printNum); [/playground]   
**Optional parameters: ** Any number of parameters can be passed to a function. If too many parameters are passed , the extra ones are ignored. If too few parameters are passed , the missing parameters get assigned to the value `undefined`. This makes it possible to provide optional arguements for javascript functions.   
Here is an example:   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="360"] //This function takes two parameters and prints the welcome message based on the value's function welcome(studentFirstName,StudentLastName) { //When no parameters are passed if(studentFirstName == undefined && StudentLastName == undefined ) { console.log("Hello Guest"); } //When only one parameter is passed else if ( StudentLastName == undefined ) { console.log("Hello "+studentFirstName); } //When both parameters are passed else { console.log("Hello "+studentFirstName+" "+StudentLastName) } } welcome(); //both parameters are not passed welcome("James");//only studentFirstName is passed welcome("James","Smith");//Both studentFirstName and studentLastName are passed [/playground] **Challenge:**   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="520"] //This function returns grade for a mark function getGrade(mark) { if (mark < 60){ return "E"; } else if (mark < 70) { return "D"; } else if (mark < 80) { return "C"; } else if (mark < 90) { return "B"; } else if (mark <= 100) { return "A"; } else { return "Z"; } } function printallgrades(item, index) { //Fill first blank with the name of the student //Fill second blank with Grade of a student. //To get the grade , call the getGrade by passing the mark console.log(____ + " "+_____); } var students = [['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68]]; students.forEach(printallgrades); [/playground]   
  
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] //This function returns garde for a mark function getGrade(mark) { if (mark < 60){ return "E"; } else if (mark < 70) { return "D"; } else if (mark < 80) { return "C"; } else if (mark < 90) { return "B"; } else if (mark <= 100) { return "A"; } else { return "Z"; } } function printallgrades(item, index) { //Fill first blank with the name of the student //Fill second blank with Grade of a student. //To get the grade , call the getGrade by passing the mark console.log(item[0] + " "+getGrade(item[1])); } var students = [['Betty', 80], ['David', 77], ['Celina', 88], ['Bush', 95], ['Aangelina', 68]]; students.forEach(printallgrades); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion] [su_divider] **4\.4 Scope**   
Scope is the set of variables, objects, and functions you have access to.JavaScript has two scopes: global and local. A variable that is declared outside a function definition is a global variable, and its value is accessible and modifiable throughout your program. A variable that is declared inside a function definition is local. It is created and destroyed every time the function is executed, and it cannot be accessed by any code outside the function.   
Functions defined inside other functions, known as nested functions, have access to their parent function's scope.Pay attention to the comments in the code below:   
[code language="javascript"] var a = 4; // a is a global variable, it can be accessed by the functions below function foo() { var b = a * 3; // b cannot be accessed outside foo function, but can be accessed by functions // defined inside foo function bar(c) { var b = 2; // another \`b\` variable is created inside bar function scope // the changes to this new \`b\` variable don't affect the old \`b\` variable console.log( a, b, c ); } bar(b * 4); } foo(); // 4, 2, 48 [/code] [su_divider] 
## Section 5 : Objects

**5\.1 Class declarations and methods**   
Classes are in fact **special functions**.One way to define a class is using a class declaration. To declare a class, you use the class keyword with the name of the class.The constructor method is a special method for creating and initializing an object created with a class. There can only be one special method with the name **constructor** in a class.   
Here is an example:   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="240"] "use strict"; class Student { //constructor to initialize the variables constructor(firstName, lastName) { this.firstName = firstName; this.lastName = lastName; } } //Create new instance 'student1' for the 'Student' class var student1 = new Student("Tom","Smith"); console.log("firstName of student1 is: "+student1.firstName); console.log("lastName of student1 is: "+student1.lastName); [/playground]   
  
**Challenge:**   
  
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="230"] class Game { //constructor to initialize the variables constructor(num) { this.num = num; } isEven(){ ______ } } var game1 = new Game(10); console.log(game1.isEven()); [/playground]   
[su_accordion] [su_spoiler title="Solution" style="fancy"] [code language="javascript"] "use strict"; class Game { //constructor to initialize the variables constructor(num) { this.num = num; } //Method to check if 'num' is even isEven(){ if(this.num%2==0) { return true; } else { return false; } } } var game1 = new Game(10); console.log(game1.isEven()); [/code] [/su_spoiler] [/su_accordion]   
  
[su_divider] **5\.2 Inheritance and overriding**   
With **extends** keyword you can specialize a class into a child class while keeping reference to the root class with the super keyword. **Static methods: **   
The **static **keyword defines a static method for a class. Static methods are called without instantiating their class and are also not callable when the class is instantiated. Static methods are often used to create utility functions for an application.   
[playground allow_anonymous="yes" height="960"] "use strict"; class Person { constructor( first, last) { this.firstName = first; this.lastName = last; } getFullName () { return this.firstName +" "+ this.lastName; } } var pers1 = new Person("Tom","Smith"); console.log("The full name of the person is: " + pers1.getFullName()); //Inheriting Person using extends keyword class Student extends Person { constructor( first, last, studentid , mark) { super( first, last); this.studentid = studentid; this.mark = mark; } // new method defined in this class getNameWithStudentid() { return super.getFullName() + "(" + this.studentid +")"; } static getGrade(mark) { if (mark < 60){ return "E"; } else if (mark < 70) { return "D"; } else if (mark < 80) { return "C"; } else if (mark < 90) { return "B"; } else if (mark <= 100) { return "A"; } else { return "Z"; } } } //Create new object student1 var student1 = new Student("Elaine","Jones","A1223"); //Calling Static method getGrade console.log("The grade for 90 marks is :"+Student.getGrade(90)); console.log("The student is: " + student1.getNameWithStudentid()); [/playground] [su_divider]

 [1]: http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_regexp.asp
 [2]: http://www.w3schools.com/js/js_math.asp
 [3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array